Add blog post about the implementation of Scala.js support for Scala 3. (#1169)
scala/scala-lang: _posts/2020-10-27-scalajs-for-scala-3.md

---
layout: blog-detail
post-type: blog
by: Sébastien Doeraene
title: "Implementing Scala.js Support for Scala 3"
---

> Today, the JS platform has become an integral part of the language.

Reviewer: I initially read the "Today," as meaning that something literally happened today. I think "These days," or perhaps "In recent years" ("In der letzte Zeit"?) would be a bit better.

Yet, until last August, support for Scala.js in Scala 3 was close to non-existent.
A first preview was shipped in Dotty 0.27.0-RC1, with support for the portable subset of Scala and native JS types.
Since then, support for non-native JS types was added and will ship as part of Scala 3.0.0-M1.
The only missing feature left is JS exports, which we will implement by the next milestone.

What did it take to add Scala.js support in Scala 3?

> How come we managed to do the necessary work in less than 3 months, whereas Scala.js for Scala 2 took 7 years to mature?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
How come did we manage to do the necessary work in less than 3 months, whereas Scala.js for Scala 2 took 7 years to mature?
```
?

Reviewer: @julienrf I think you mean "How did we", not "Home come did we"

Reviewer 2: Hmm, I’m not sure… I’m not an english-native, but “How come we managed to” reads weird to me. Maybe it’s correct?

Reviewer: You're right that Seb's original was awkward. I'm suggesting "How did we manage to do the necessary work" (no "come", you left the "come" in your version)

Those are questions we aim to explore in this post.
After some background on the architecture of Scala.js for Scala 2, we will cover which components had to be rewritten for Scala 2, and which ones we could reuse.

> We will see that only a small fraction required a rewrite.

Reviewer: I feel like the intro could indicate more strongly who will want to read this and who won't. Like is this only of interest to compiler hackers?

As I always say on every blog post PR, I think the intro should give away the conclusions. Don't make the reader read the whole thing to get the basic takeaways — it's not suspense fiction.

Author: I had tried to anticipate your comment about that (having seen it on previous blog posts), but clearly what I wrote was not good enough. Is it better now?

Reviewer: Yes, I think this was an improvement.

## Background: the Scala.js architecture

> When we use Scala.js, it can sometimes appear a bit magical.

Reviewer: The thought here isn't really clear. Maybe simply omit this sentence.

### A compiler plugin

When compiling a Scala.js codebase, the .scala source files are compiled with scalac, augmented with the Scala.js compiler plugin.
From scalac, we receive parsing, type checking, elaboration (type inference, implicit resolution, overload resolution, etc.), as well as many transformation phases.
The compiler plugin, comparatively to the rest of scalac, is small: it takes the internal compiler ASTs that have been lowered to contain JVM-style classes, interfaces, methods and instructions, and turns them into Scala.js IR (.sjsir files).

Thanks to everything it receives from scalac for free, the Scala.js compiler plugin does not have to deal with a lot of Scala-specific features.
Traits have been lowered to interfaces; lazy vals have been desugared; nested classes, defs, and functions have been translated to top-level classes with methods; etc.
This is how Scala.js is able to keep up-to-date with all the versions of Scala 2, and be available on the same day as new Scala releases.
Not all compile-to-JS languages have that property!

### `.sjsir`files

> .sjsir files are similar to .class files, although they are AST-based (instead of stack-machine-based) and contain features dedicated to JavaScript interoperability.

Reviewer: Do you also want to make a comparison to TASTy, or is it too much of a tangent?

Author: I have added a section, although it *is* a tangent, because people keep asking about it. Hopefully I will from now on be able to refer to this blog post to dispel the myth.

In fact, there is nothing Scala-specific in the entire linker, other than a few optimizations targeted at Scala-like code.
This is important because it means that the linker is independent of the version of Scala: we use the same linker irrespective of the version of Scala that was used to create the .sjsir files.
In theory, we could even compile other JVM languages like Kotlin or Java to the Scala.js IR, then use our linker to emit JavaScript code.
While we have a proof-of-concept for Java, it is nowhere near usable, however.

.sjsir files have binary compatibility guarantees similar to those of .class files.
With a few exceptions related to JS interop annotations, if changes to a .class files are binary compatible, then the changes applied to the corresponding .sjsir files are also binary compatible.
This allows Scala.js codebase to meaningfully use MiMa to check that they do not break their binary API.

The Scala.js linker (optimizer) takes the .sjsir files from the application and from all the transitive dependencies.
In particular, the .sjsir files that are built for the Scala standard library and for the JDK subset.

> The linker optimizes all of them together, then emits one .js file for the entire codebase.

Reviewer 2: Maybe consider adding a diagram to make it easier to get a global picture?

Author: Oh, there was a diagram in my draft. I forgot to include it in the .md port 🤦‍♂️

I'll add it back tomorrow morning.

Author: Done.

### Components of Scala.js core

The components involved here have the following sizes (not counting test files):

![Sizes of the components of Scala.js](/resources/img/blog/scalajs-for-scala-3/components-sizes.svg)

The two biggest components, "scalac compiler" and "Scala standard library", are not part of Scala.js itself.
They are reused from the core Scala repository.

Among the components of Scala.js itself, the linker/optimizer and the subset of the JDK are the biggest, and account for 74% of the total.
In comparison, the 8,000 lines of code of the Scala.js compiler plugin represent only 11% of the total 69 kLoC.

Add to that about 68,000 lines of testing code, and we get close to 140,000 lines of code for [the Scala.js core repository](https://github.com/scala-js/scala-js).
For fun, we can compare that to the sizes of the repositories for Scala 2 and Scala 3:

![Sizes of the core Scala repositories](/resources/img/blog/scalajs-for-scala-3/repositories-sizes.svg)

It's worth pointing out that Scala 3 reuses the Scala standard library of Scala 2, so basically those two repositories have the same size.

## Supporting Scala.js in Scala 3

> Scala 3 has an entirely new compiler codebase, reimplemented from scratch.

Reviewer: This isn't really true — the back end was copied, not reimplemented.

Author: That's a bit pedantic, though, don't you think? Also it has now diverged quite a bit, so it's not even a simple copy-paste anymore. It is almost as much a reimplementation as the Scala.js back-end was.

Reviewer: I didn't know it had diverged that far.

For example, it removes the Scala 2 compiler plugin that sbt-scalajs adds, and instead adds the compiler flag `-scalajs`.
When the functionality of sbt-dotty gets merged into sbt itself, sbt-scalajs will be adapted to directly handle the setup of Scala 3.

Thanks to the combination of sbt-scalajs and sbt-dotty, a straightforward build works out of the box with Scala 3 and Scala.js.
A small example would be:

```scala
// project/plugins.sbt
addSbtPlugin("ch.epfl.lamp" % "sbt-dotty" % "0.4.3")
addSbtPlugin("org.scala-js" % "sbt-scalajs" % "1.3.0")
```

```scala
// build.sbt
ThisBuild / scalaVersion := "0.27.0-RC1"
val myScala3JSProject = project
  .enablePlugins(ScalaJSPlugin)
  .settings(
    // Scala.js project with a main method
    scalaJSUseMainModuleInitializer := true,
  )
```

### Reusing the tests

While reusing all of the above was definitely a huge time saver (several person·years), it is the reuse of tests that I valued the most during this work.
Have you ever dreamed about implementing a significant system from scratch without having to write the tests, because the tests already exist?
If yes, you understand what I mean!

> 

Reviewer: Love this paragraph.

I remember telling my boss on the NetLogo project that if the devil told me he was going to either delete our compiler or delete our test suite and offered me the choice, I would far rather he delete the compiler, I wouldn't even hesitate, no contest!
